1. CRITICAL RESPONSE TO “THE CULTURE INDUSTRY"

He complained to the dean about the radical students in his classes who were making
í teaching impossible. In the winter term of 1968-69 students occupied a number of buildings
| at the University at Frankfurt, including the Institute for Social Research. After the strike
ended, Adorno returned to teaching, but his lectures continued to be disrupted, including
one “tasteless demonstration” in which three females bared their breasts. Adorno died a few

| months later (Jáger, 2004, p. 201-08).

 

1 Critical Response to “The Culture Industry”

The 1972 English-language translation marked the first real appearance of the idea of the
culture industry outside of a German context. In the years since there have been numer-
ous criticisms of the text, not least since Adorno made sweeping generalizations about “the

commodified and fetishized character of all cultural goods” (Cook, 1996, p. 113). For the
generally sympathetic Deborah Cook, Adorno erred in not discussing the processes of cul-
tural production, and failed to examine the culture industry's economic dependence on other

business sectors, including marketing and advertising (Cook, 1996, p. 48).

| For Terry Eagleton, both Adorno and Marcuse overestimated the dominant ideology, be-
lieving that “capitalist society languishes in the grip of an all-pervasive reification” (Eagleton,
1991, p. 46). Still, Eagleton conceded that “the diffusion of dominant values and beliefs

among oppressed peoples in society has some part to play in the reproduction of the sys-
tem as a whole" (Eagleton, 1991, p. 36). Fredric Jameson pointed out that Adorno's idea
of a culture industry was historically limited, since the society that developed in the 1960s
and 1970s with new media went beyond the cultural possibilities available during the 1940s.
While the idea of the culture industry can be defended as a useful theory for industrial soci-
eties between 1920 and 1970, trying to use it today weakens its effectiveness (Hohendah,
1995, p. 146-48). Thus, for a some critics, the value of the idea of the culture industry would
appear to be merely historical, if they in fact conceded that it had any value at all.

Thus for some critics modernist works would be counteracting forces against the dominant
ideology. As noted in the example of Orson Welles, however, it may be the case that the
dominant ideology can co-opt modernist works for its own ends. The idea of the culture
industry has had an importance in critical theory since its appearance in the 1940s, in that
it has led to thought about the role of mass communications in relation to ideology, and
hence, society. Since Adorno made sweeping generalizations about the impact of the culture
industry, and since he did not systematically explore how the culture industry operated, it has
been generally easy for some to dismiss the idea of a culture industry. lt is nonetheless the
case that motion pictures are still made by large companies and that their movies largely rely
on formulaic plots. Itis also the case that radio is inereasingly controlled by a small number

of companies, which tend to impose restrictions on how stations operate. As a broadcast
medium, television is very much related to both radio and film, and shares with them qualities
that situation it in the culture industry. While there is a democratizing aspect to the Internet
| (in that anyone can create a web site), it happens that the commercial companies operating
on the Internet continue to maintain an ideological function. For example, one seldom sees
| new stories on MSNBC or Yahoo that would question the prerogatives of corporate America.
| A reexamination of the idea of the culture industry may be necessary in order to theorize on

how mass communication media propagate dominant ideologies.
